# Near-​ Death Experiences and  Claims of Past-​ Life Memories

Bruce Greyson, MD
_University of Virginia_

_ABSTRACT:_ death experiences (NDEs) suggest that consciousness may continue to function after death of the body. The life reviews Some features of near-​
of some NDEs include what seem to be memories of a past lifetime, some of
which involve verifiable details, suggesting that the experiencer has lived more
than one life and can recall events from successive lives. These apparent past-​
life memories parallel the claims of young children who remember past lives.
Furthermore, some children’s past-​ life memories include scenes from the period
between lives that parallel descriptions of the realm in which NDEs occur. Some
children’s past-​ life memories include anomalous features that contradict common beliefs about reincarnation. In addition, the idea that humans reincarnate
into a new Earthly body seems to contradict the common NDE feature of encountering deceased persons in a non-​ Earthly realm. However, those apparent
contradictions can be resolved by a reconceptualization of prevailing ideas about
time and about what aspects of human consciousness may survive bodily death.

_KEYWORDS:_ life memories, reincarnation, survival of death near-​ death experiences, life review, past-​

Near-​ death experiences (NDEs) are intensely vivid and realistic experiences, often interpreted by the individual as spiritual or mystical,
that typically occur under extreme physiological conditions such as
trauma, cessation of brain activity, deep general anesthesia, or cardiac arrest, although they may also occur under conditions of psychological proximity to death, as in accidents or illnesses in which people
fear they are about to die (Holden et al., 2009). According to prevail-

**Bruce Greyson** , MD, is the Chester F. Carlson Professor Emeritus of Psychiatry &
Neurobehavioral Sciences at the University of Virginia. He was one of the founders
of the International Association for Near-​ Death Studies and has focused his research
on near-​ death experiences and their aftereffects and implications. Correspondence
regarding this article should be sent to Dr. Greyson at e-​ mail: cbg4d@virginia.edu.

212 _Journal of Near-Death Studies, 39(3), Fall 2021 © 2021 IANDS_
_h_ _/_ _/d i_ _/10 17514/JNDS 2021 39 3_ _212 226_


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 213

ing views in neuroscience, during experiences associated with severe
physical trauma, no awareness or sensory experiences of any kind
should be possible, yet experiencers report such phenomena. Common
features of NDEs include feelings of peace and joy, exceptionally lucid
thought processes and perceptions, a sense of one’s consciousness being out of the physical body, seeing an unusually brilliant light, encountering other beings and other apparent realms of dimensions of
existence, and a sense of unconditional love and wellbeing (Greyson et
al., 2009).
In many NDEs, the experiencer’s mental functioning and perception
seem to be greatly enhanced despite physiological evidence that the
brain is severely impaired. Furthermore, some experiencers report accurately seeing events at some distant location from their unconscious
body, such as in another room of the hospital; or an experiencer might
meet a deceased loved one who then communicates verifiable information that the experiencer could not have known through normal sensory or rational means. Such profound features of NDEs suggest that
the consciousness of an individual may function independent of the
physical body and that it may continue to function after bodily death.

**The Life Review**

A prominent feature of many NDEs is the “life review,” in which
scenes from the experiencer’s past come flooding back. Gregg Nome,
who was drowning at age 24 when his inner tube capsized after going
over rapids, described a typical life review:

I realized that I was a passive observer in the process, and it was as
if someone else was running the projector. I was looking at my life
objectively for the first time ever. I saw the good as well as the bad.
The images began with living color scenes of my childhood. I was
astonished, because I saw myself sitting in a baby’s highchair and
picking up some food with my hand and throwing it onto the floor.
And there was my mom, 25 years younger, telling me that good boys
don’t throw their food on the floor. Next, I saw myself at a lake on a
summer vacation we took when I was about 3 or 4 years old. My older
brother and I had to swim with an air bubble on our backs to help us
float, because neither of us was able to swim on our own yet. For some
reason I was mad at him, and to demonstrate my point, I threw his
air bubble into the lake. Mark was very upset and began to cry, and
my father walked over and explained to me that it wasn’t nice to do
what I did, and that he and I would have to row out in the boat to get
it, and I would have to apologize. I was amazed at how many scenes I
was seeing that had long since been forgotten.


-----

214 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

It seemed that all of the scenes had to do with experiences that I
had learned from in some way as I matured. I also saw events that
were traumatic in various ways. The images continued at high speeds,
and I knew that time was about to run out, for the images were getting closer and closer to the present. Then the images ceased. There
was only darkness, and a feeling of a short pause, like something was
about to happen. (G. Nome, personal communication, March 4, 1986)

This flood of memories in the face of imminent death had been
described before the concept of NDEs became well-​ known (Noyes &
Kletti, 1977; Stevenson & Cook, 1995). In fact, descriptions of life
reviews go back centuries. In 1791, when British Rear-​ Admiral Sir
Francis Beaufort was only a 17-​ year-​ old midshipman, he fell off a boat
into Portsmouth Harbor on the southern coast of England (Beaufort,
1858). Unfortunately, he had not yet learned to swim. After exhausting himself struggling to breathe, he lost consciousness and immediately experienced a feeling of calmness and noticed changes in his
thinking. He later described it this way:

From the moment that all exertion ceased—which I imagine was the
immediate consequence of complete suffocation—. . . thought rose
above thought with a rapidity of succession that is not only indescribable, but probably inconceivable by anyone who has not himself been
in a similar situation. The course of those thoughts I can even now in
great measure retrace—the event which had just taken place—the
awkwardness that had produced it—were the first series of reflections that occurred. They took then a wider range—our last cruise—a
former voyage, and shipwreck—my school—the progress I had made
there, and the time I had mis-​ spent—and even all my boyish pursuits
and adventures. Thus traveling backwards, every past incident of my
life seemed to glance across my recollection in retrograde succession;
not, however, in mere outline, as here stated, but the picture filled up
with every minute and collateral feature. In short, the whole period
of my existence seemed to be placed before me in a kind of panoramic
review, and each act of it seemed to be accompanied by a consciousness of right or wrong, or by some reflection on its cause or its consequences; indeed, many trifling events which had been long forgotten
then crowded into my imagination, and with the character of recent
familiarity. (Beaufort, 1858, pp. 77–78)

death experiencers who participated in my research, 175 (25%) reported a life review. Of those, 37% reported that Among 698 near-​
_their entire lives_ flashed before their eyes, from birth to the present
(30%), in reverse order (17%), in apparently random order (26%), or
all at once (28%). Eighty-​ one percent said that they had no control of


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 215

the life review. The vast majority (84%) described their life review as
more vivid than ordinary memories. Some experiencers told me that
they were shown images from their past, as on a movie screen or on
pages in a book, but 47% reported that they re-​ experienced these past
events as if they were still happening, with all the original sensations
and feelings.
Of those who reported a life review, 72% said that it changed their
ideas of what things are important in life, and 86% reported making
significant life changes as a result of their life reviews. Fifty-​ one percent of those who had a life review experienced a sense of judgment,
most often judging themselves, about the rightness or wrongness of
their actions.
Many near-​ death experiencers reported that their life review not
only helped them cope with losses, guilt, and conflict and find meaning in their lives, but also helped them make changes in their behavior
based on what they had learned. And 76% of those who reported re-​
experiencing their life events said that they did so not only through
their own eyes _but also from the perspective of others,_ feeling those
other people’s emotions as well as their own. They reported that this
kind of “empathic life review” helped them understand the pain they
may have caused others and the reasons for the pain they may have
suffered at the hands of others.

**Apparent Past-​** **Life Memories Occurring**
**Within the Life Review**

Some life reviews additionally include mental impressions or images
that did not seem to relate to the experiencer’s current lifetime. In
these cases, experiencers reported apparent memories that they believed related to a previous Earthly lifetime.
After struggling with lymphoma for four years, Anita Moorjani fell
into a coma. Her husband rushed her to the hospital, where her oncologist ordered a full-​ sized tumors throughout her body, and her vital organs seemed to have shut down. Her body scan. They found lemon-​
brain and lungs were filled with fluid, and liquid oozed from lesions on
her skin. The doctors told her husband she would not make it through
the night. But although she had no use of her physical senses, Anita
was more acutely aware of all that was going on around her than she
had ever been in her normal physical state:


-----

216 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

I was drifting in and out of consciousness during this time and could
feel my spirit actually leaving my body. I saw and heard conversations
between my husband and the doctors taking place outside my room,
about 40 feet away down a hallway. I was later able to verify this
conversation to my shocked husband. Then I actually “crossed over”
to another dimension, where I was engulfed in a total feeling of love.
I also experienced extreme clarity of why I had the cancer, why I had
come into this life in the first place, what role everyone in my family
played in my life in the grand scheme of things, and generally how life
works . . . .
I know I was drifting in and out between the two worlds, but every
time I drifted into the “other side,” I was shown more and more scenes.
There was one which showed how my life had touched all the people in
it; it was sort of like a tapestry and showed how I affected everyone’s
lives around me. There was another which showed my brother on a
plane, having heard the news I was dying, coming to see me. This was
verified to me as, when I started to come round, my brother was there,
having just got off a plane. I then saw a glimpse of my brother and
me and somehow seemed to understand it was a previous life, where
I was much older than he and was like a mother to him. In this life,
he is older than I. I saw in that life I was very protective towards him.
This life I was now perceiving with my brother seemed to take place
in an underdeveloped rural setting, in a time and location I couldn’t
identify. We were living in a sparsely furnished mud hut, and I looked
after him while our parents went out to work in the fields. I suddenly
became aware he was on the plane to come and see me, and felt, “I
can’t do this to him, can’t let him come and see me dead.” Then I
also saw how my husband’s purpose was linked to mine, and how we
decided to come and experience this life together . . . . (A. Moorjani,
personal communication, November 25, 2008)

For Moorjani, the life review in her NDE was not limited to this
lifetime but, rather, included images and insights that appeared to be
from a past life. This raises the question of whether “past life” memories are anything more than fantasy.
The flashes of past lives in Moorjani’s life review, though quite compelling to her, included no specific details that could be corroborated
by independent investigators and, therefore, considered evidential.
That was not the case, however, with David Moquin’s NDE, when he
was hospitalized with double pneumonia at age 48. He described visions of past lives during his NDE as he was in and out of coma for
several days:

During that time, I experienced at least two events that felt like
past lifetimes. The one that has haunted me for the past 24 years


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 217

was that of burning to death in an airplane crash. I kept seeing myself on fire and trying to reach a field just past a line of
trees and a barbed-​ wire-​ type fence. I crashed, hit my head, and
tried to crawl out as I was engulfed in fire and couldn’t breathe.
Many years later a psychic told me that in my last lifetime I died
landing a fighter plane on an odd single digit day in November 1944.
I was born December 21, 1944. My daughter, hearing the recording
of the reading, googled and found that Captain Fryer was the only
pilot that died on an odd single digit day that November, and that
he died trying to land his burning P-​ 51 Mustang. My favorite plane
has always been the P-​ 51. The model sits on my desk. My daughter
asked me questions and I seemed to know the names of my wing commander, squadron commander, mother, and father. (D. Moquin, personal communication, October 29, 2018)

Unlike Moorjani’s apparent memories of a past life, Moquin’s included verifiable details that were subsequently corroborated as true
for a particular person who died a month before Moquin was born. A
tantalizing possibility is that Moquin’s memories from his NDE—​ and
those of young children who seem to recall accurate accounts of the
life of someone from the past—​ may provide compelling evidence that
people live more than once.

**Research Into Claims of Past-​** **Life Memories**

Reincarnation is a central idea in many Asian religions, and a national survey by the Pew Research Center found that one-​ third of all
Americans—​ even a third of Mainline Protestants and a third of Roman Catholics whose contemporary religious orthodoxy excludes belief in reincarnation—​ believe that humans may at some point after
death return to live another life here on Earth (www.pewresearch.org
/fact-​ tank/2018/10/01/new-​ age-​ beliefs-​ common-​ among-​ both-​ religious
-​ and-​ nonreligious-​ americans/). Beyond reincarnation or rebirth into
another lifetime being just a religious or spiritual belief, there may be
objective evidence that people can live more than one life.
Researchers at the University of Virginia and at other universities
around the globe have studied more than 2,000 cases of very young
children—​ who claimed to recall details of a past life (Stevenson, 2001; Tucker, 2012). In about two-​ before they were of school age—​ thirds
of those cases, they have been able to identify the person the child
claimed to have been in that past life, based on the child’s memories
matching specific details of the claimed past life.
Ian Stevenson, the psychiatrist who pioneered this research start-


-----

218 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

ing in the 1960s, generally limited his investigation to very young
children, generally between the ages of 2 and 5, before they had
learned to read, in order to avoid claimed past-​ life memories that were
likely to be contaminated by things the child may have read or seen.
He also limited his studies to memories that came to the children
spontaneously. He particularly avoided memories recovered in hypnotic past-​ life regression, because of the increased suggestibility of
people when there are hypnotized. The purported past lives recalled
under hypnosis may be extremely plausible and convincing to the person having the experience, but experiments have shown how easily
suggestions given by a hypnotist can influence the features of the purported past life to conform to these suggestions (Baker, 1982; Kampman & Hirvenoja, 1978; Spanos et al., 1991; Zolik, 1962). The issue is
not that information acquired under hypnosis is never accurate, but,
rather, that it is not reliable enough to be trusted as scientific evidence
without additional verification.
The young children that Stevenson and other researchers have investigated not only have memories of past lives but also often show
behaviors, such as phobias or preferences, that are unusual within the
context of their own families and are not explained by any current life
events. However, these unexplained behaviors are usually consistent
with the child’s statements about a previous life. For example, a young
child who remembers a life that ended in drowning may show an unnatural fear of water, or a young child in a Hindu family who remembers a life as a devout Muslim may refuse to eat food not prepared
according to Islamic law. Some of these children have birthmarks and
birth defects that correspond to wounds or other marks on the deceased person whose life the child claims to remember (Stevenson,
1997). In many cases of this type, autopsy reports of the deceased
people have confirmed these correspondences.

**Problematic Features of Past-​** **Life Memories**

These cases of young children are too consistently verified by independent means to be written off as fantasy and wish fulfillment and may
be regarded as evidence _supporting_ a belief in reincarnation. There
are, however, some cases in the University of Virginia collection that
suggest that their interpretation is not as straightforward as our common conceptions of reincarnation would suggest. For example, in some
cases, researchers have investigated _two or more children_ who recall
the same past life (Keil, 2010).


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 219

Anthropologist Antonia Mills (1988) described several cases of apparent multiple simultaneous reincarnations among the Gitksan tribe
in British Columbia, noting that the Gitksan value being reborn simultaneous in several people as an indication of being a “good” person
(p. 34). As with other First Nations tribes from that region, the Gitksan consider “dreams, visits from the disembodied or ghostly previous
personality, birthmarks, and/or memory or behaviour appropriate to
the previous personality as the means of knowing who has been reincarnated as whom” (p. 34).
In one illustrative Gitksan case, Susan Albert died of a stroke in
her late 70s, but before she died, she said she wanted to come back as
her granddaughter’s child. Within three months, that granddaughter
gave birth to a baby girl, Rhonda Mead. The baby was physically and
behaviorally precocious, and when she was 15 months old, she was
taken to visit relatives in a town 750 miles away. When she saw her
uncle sitting in her great-​ grandmother’s favorite easy chair, she tried
to push him out of it, yelling, “That’s my chair!” and according to her
mother, “She just screamed bloody murder if anybody sat in her chair.”
She also insisted on sitting in one particular chair at the dinner table,
claiming it was hers, although she was so small she could barely see
over the edge of the table while sitting on it. She also identified pieces
of jewelry and other objects of Susan Albert’s as hers, and mentioned
by name her great-​ grandmother’s dog, who had died before she was
born. Furthermore, she had an oddly shaped scar on her right arm
that resembled a tattoo her great-​ grandmother had on that arm, and
expressed likes and dislikes that were the same as Susan Albert’s.
However, around the same time as Rhonda’s birth, two other baby
girls, Sheila and Susan Richards, were born to the extended family,
both of whom were identified by Susan Albert’s family as having been
Susan Albert in their past life, based largely on dreams. Mills was not
able to interview either of these other children to ascertain whether
they had verifiable memories of their great-​ grandmother’s life.
Mills (1988) has investigated other cases of multiple children in
several of the Pacific Northwest tribes who were believed to be reincarnations of the same deceased person, and Stevenson (1969, 1985,
1986) noted such cases among the Inuit in Alaska and among the Igbo
in Nigeria.
In other problematic cases, a child may appear remember the past
lives of _two different people who lived at the same time._ We have a
small number of such purported cases from the files at the University
of Virginia, but have not published them because the identification


-----

220 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

of the deceased person alleged to have reincarnated is not well established. And in some cases, the person whose life the child remembers died _after the child was born._ The University of Virginia files
include thirty-​ seven such cases, which raise questions about how to
interpret the children’s knowledge of someone else’s life. One alternative explanation of these “anomalous dates” cases are not examples of
reincarnation but rather of possession of a child after birth (Matlock
& Mishlove, 2019). The typical claims of children who recall past lives
are challenging enough to the current understanding of the relationship between mind and brain, but these problematic cases introduce
additional complications in their interpretation. Because of these inconsistencies, Stevenson (1966, 2003), who initiated this line of research, never claimed that these cases were _proof_ of reincarnation.
Instead, he referred to them as “cases _suggestive_ of reincarnation” and
“cases _of the reincarnation type._ ”

**Parallels in Near-​** **Death Experiences**
**and Claimed Past-​** **Life Memories**

Both claimed memories of past lives and NDEs have been controversial topics in academia, because they challenge contemporary models
of the mind-​ brain relationship and may be open to multiple interpretations. I know some scholars who have been willing to accept one
of these challenging phenomena but not the other. Given, however,
that both NDEs and claimed memories of past lives bear on the mind-​
brain relationship and on whether the mind can continue to function
after death of the brain, data from the two phenomena might actually
complement each other and form a bridge to a new understanding of
mind and brain and of the survival question, and perhaps shed light
on each other.
death experiencers became more open to the idea of reincarnation after their Several researchers have reported anecdotally that near-​
NDEs (Gallup & Proctor, 1982; Ring, 1980; Sutherland, 1992). Amber
Wells, an undergraduate student of psychologist and near-​ death researcher Kenneth Ring, carried out a survey comparing near-​ death
experiencers and non-​ experiencers who were interested in NDEs. She
found that belief in reincarnation was equally strong in the experiencers and in the comparison group of non-​ experiencers (Wells, 1993).
death experiencers who have participated in my research, one-​ Among more than 200 near-​ third said they believed that after death


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 221

they will be “recycled” and reincarnated or reborn in the physical
world—​ and another third reportedly believed that reincarnation is
“possible.” Those are the same percentages of belief in reincarnation
that the Pew Research Center found among the American population
as a whole. However, some near-​ death experiencers related their belief
in reincarnation to specific events in their NDEs (Gallup & Proctor,
1982; Ring, 1980; Sutherland, 1992; Wells, 1993).
Some young children’s descriptions of past-​ life memories correspond
to descriptions of NDEs. Medical student Poonam Sharma and child
psychiatrist Jim Tucker examined cases of Burmese children who
claimed to remember not only a past life, but also _the period between_
_the past life and this one_ . Purported memories of the intermission period between lives show cultural differences between Asian and Western children (Matlock & Giesler-​ Petersen, 2016). Sharma and Tucker
found striking similarities between what Burmese children said about
the environment between lives and what Burmese near-​ death experiencers said about the world of the NDE (Sharma & Tucker, 2004).
That similarity would seem to support the belief that these past-​ life
memories may be real memories of another incarnation.

**Contribution of NDEs to an Understanding**
**of Apparent Past-​** **Life Memories**

Apparent memories of a past life that occur during the life review
of an NDE would seem to support a belief in reincarnation, and to
strengthen confidence in the claims of young children to recall past
lives. However, some findings from near-​ death research suggest that
an understanding of claimed past-​ life memories is not straightforward.
In an apparent contradiction to the idea of reincarnation, many
near-​ death experiencers report having met deceased loved ones in
some seemingly otherworldly environment in their NDEs. The question arises how it might be possible for deceased people to continue
existing in some otherworldly realm after death if they have been reborn into a new Earthly life. The simplest resolution to this apparent
contradiction might be that deceased individuals might reside in some
afterlife environment while awaiting reincarnation on Earth (Matlock & Mishlove, 2019). Alternatively, one might speculate that different people may have different afterlife scenarios, some being reborn
and others remaining in some otherworldly realm; or that one person
might have several different afterlife scenarios, including both rebirth


-----

222 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

and continued existence in an otherworldly realm. This latter possibility is compatible with reported cases of mediumistic communications allegedly from deceased individuals who claim to have already
reincarnated but are able to leave their new bodies and present to the
medium as discarnate spirits, and cases of apparitions of deceased
individuals that appear after they have been reborn (Haraldsson &
Matlock, 2016, pp. 250–251). Furthermore, given the claim of many
near-​ death experiencers that the familiar concept of time as a linear
progression doesn’t apply in the afterlife (Greyson, 2021, pp. 32–34), it
might be possible both to continue to exist in some otherworldly realm
and also “simultaneously” to be reborn on Earth.

**Altered Concept of Time in NDEs**

Many experiencers report that in their NDEs they had not only an
altered sense of time but also a sense of complete timelessness. Joe
Geraci, a 36-​ old policeman who almost bled to death after surgery, described this sense in his NDE: year-​

I knew what it was like to experience eternity, where there was no
time. It’s the hardest thing to try and describe to someone. How do you
describe a state of timelessness, where there’s nothing progressing
from one point to another, where it’s all there, and you’re totally immersed in it? (J. Geraci, personal communication, December 15, 1981)

Among 698 people who shared their NDEs with me, 415 (59%) said
that they had a sense of timelessness in their NDEs. Some of these
experiencers said that time may still have existed on Earth but that
the realm of the NDE seemed to be outside of the flow of time. Everything in their NDE seemed to be happening at once, or they seemed
to move forward and backward in time. Others said that they realized
in the NDE that time as humans know it was only ever an artificial
construct of the brain and never really existed, that is, that the very
concept of time had no independent reality. These may be alternate
ways of trying to describe a perception that is ultimately ineffable.
Once again, given the claim of many near-​ death experiencers that
time as humans typically know it doesn’t exist in the otherworldly
realm, then it might be possible both to be reincarnated into another
body on Earth and also to persist simultaneously in a non-​ Earthly
realm or dimension.
A hint of this kind of ambiguity is apparent in Moorjani’s account
of her NDE. She reported that her experience gave her a more nu-


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 223

anced understanding of reincarnation than her traditional Hindu
background suggested:

Time felt different in that realm, too, and I felt all moments at once.
I was aware of everything that pertained to me—​ past, present, and
future—​ simultaneously. I became conscious of what seemed to be simultaneous lives playing out. As I was experiencing the sensations
associated with being a protective older sister, ensuring that there
was enough for us to eat and we were safe from any undesirable external elements, it didn’t feel like a past life. Even though the scene
appeared historical, in that realm, it still felt as though it were happening here and now.
Before my NDE, probably because of my culture, I used to think
that the purpose of life was . . . to evolve beyond the reincarnation
cycle of birth and death . . . . But after my NDE, I feel differently. This
is primarily because the concept of reincarnation in its conventional
form of a progression of lifetimes, running sequentially one after
the other, wasn’t supported by my NDE. I realized that time doesn’t
move in a linear fashion unless we’re using the filter of our bodies
and minds. Once we’re no longer limited by our earthly senses, every
moment exists simultaneously. I’ve come to think that the concept of
reincarnation is really just an interpretation, a way for our intellect to
make sense of all existence happening at once . . . .
In the NDE state, I was aware of my brother on a plane coming
to see me and of conversations the doctors were having outside my
room and down the hall. I understood many aspects of my future life,
as they would be panning out. This showed me that time, space, and
solid matter don’t always exist as we normally think of them. During
my NDE, I felt that I could focus on any point in time that I needed
to access . . . .
It’s as though our earthly minds convert what happens around us
into a sequence, but, in actuality, when we’re not expressing through
our bodies, everything occurs simultaneously, whether past, present,
or future.
Although being able to perceive all points of time simultaneously
lent to the atmosphere a clarity in that realm, recalling it and writing
about it creates confusion. The sequence isn’t obvious when there’s no
linear time, making the retelling sound clumsy.
It seems as though our five senses limit us to focus on one point in
time at any given moment, and we string these together to create an
illusion of linear reality. . . . Because of this, I believe that when someone has a glimpse of what have previously been interpreted as “past
lives,” they’re actually accessing parallel or simultaneous existences,
because all time exists at once. (A. Moorjani, personal communication,
November 25, 2008)


-----

224 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

In this narrative, Moorjani claimed to have perceived features of
her NDE with crystal clarity, yet found it difficult to describe them
adequately with words. This paradox, common to many NDE narratives, makes it difficult to find agreement among experiencers as to
how they describe an after-​ death state.

**Conclusion**

NDEs that include apparent past-​ life memories in the life review suggest that humans can live on this Earthly plane more than once, and
memories of past lives that include descriptions of the period between
lives support the validity of NDEs. But little of that cross-​ validation
between NDEs and apparent memories of past lives can be considered
scientific evidence. At this point it appears that the question of reincarnation is a matter for which NDEs provide tantalizing directions
for further research rather than definitive answers.
Cases indicating simultaneous physical existences along with the
experience of timelessness that so many near-​ death experiencers have
described suggests that an alternate view of the nature of reincarnation may be necessary. Rather than conceptualizing it as a series of incarnations over linear time—​ the normal perception of time in Earthly
life—​ it may involve incarnations that occur simultaneously in a state
of timelessness in which everything is happening all at once—​ the perception of time that experiencers report during their NDEs. Especially
for the majority of people who have not experienced the timelessness of
an NDE this paradigmatic shift in thinking about the nature of time
can be challenging.
In particular, the temporal inconsistencies between encounters
with deceased persons in NDEs and rebirth into subsequent Earthly
lives, like so many ineffable features of NDEs, are challenging for
scientists. These apparent contradictions and ineffability call for the
identification of different methodologies or different means of expression to investigate them. But science is not a static discipline; it is
constantly updating its technologies and conceptual models. In order
to understand in what way human consciousness may survive bodily
death, researchers need to be flexible in the conceptual models both of
time and its apparent passage and of what it means to survive. Only by
remaining flexible in conceptualizing and integrating evidence from
NDEs, from apparent memories of past lives, and from other evidence
suggestive of survival such as mediumship, spontaneous visions of the


-----

BRUCE GREYSON, MD 225

deceased, and instrumental transcommunication, can humanity hope
to reach a better understanding of postmortem survival.

**References**


Baker, R. A. (1982). The effect of suggestion on past-​ lives regression. _American_
_Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 25_ , 71–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/00029157.19
82.10404067
Beaufort, F. (1858). _Notice of Rear-​_ _Admiral Sir Francis Beaufort, K. C. B_ . J. D.
Potter.
Gallup, G., & Proctor, W. (1982). _Adventures in immortality: A look beyond the_
_threshold of death._ McGraw-​ Hill.
Greyson, B. (2021). _After: A doctor explores what near-​_ _death experiences reveal_
_about life and beyond._ St. Martin’s Essentials.
Greyson, B., Kelly, E. W., & Kelly, E. F. (2009). Explanatory models for near-​

death experiences. In J. M. Holden, B. Greyson, B., & D. James (Eds.), _The_
_handbook of near-​_ _death experiences: Thirty years of investigation_ (pp. 213–
234). Praeger/ABC-​ CLIO.
Haraldsson, E., & Matlock, J. G. (2016). _I saw a light and came here: Children’s_
_experiences of reincarnation._ Hove, UK: White Crow Books.
Holden, J. M., Greyson, B., & James, D. (2009). The field of near-​ death studies:
Past, present, and future. In J. M. Holden, B. Greyson, & D. James (Eds.), _The_
_handbook of near-​_ _death experiences: Thirty years of investigation_ (pp. 1–16).
Praeger/ABC-​ CLIO.
Kampman, R, & Hirvenoja, R. (1978). Dynamic relation of the secondary personality induced by hypnosis to the present personality. In F. H. Frankel & H. S.
Zamansky (Eds.), _Hypnosis at its bicentennial_ (pp. 183–188). Plenum Press.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-​ 1-​ 4613-​ 2859-​ 9_17
Keil, J. (2010). Questions of the reincarnation type. _Journal of Scientific Exploration 24,_ 79–99.
Matlock, J. G., & Giesler-​ Petersen, I. (2016). Asian versus Western intermission
memories: Universal features and cultural variations. _Journal of Near-​_ _Death_
_Studies, 35, 3–19._ https://doi.org/10.17514/JNDS-​ 2016-​ 35-​ 1-​ p3-​ 29.
Matlock, J. G., & Mishlove, J. (2019). Signs of reincarnation: Exploring beliefs,
cases, and theory. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Mills, A. (1988). A preliminary investigation of cases of reincarnation among
the Beaver and Gitksan Indians. _Anthropologica, 30,_ 23–59. https://doi.org
/10.2307/25605246
Noyes, R., & Kletti, R. (1977). Panoramic memory: A response to the threat of
death. _Omega, 8,_ 181–194. http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/0UD7-​ H3WR-​ 1ENN-​ 57CN
Ring, K. (1980). _death experience._ Coward, McCann & Geoghegan. _Life at death: A scientific investigation of the near-​_
Sharma, P., & Tucker, J. (2004). Cases of the reincarnation type with memories from the intermission between lives. _Journal of Near-​_ _Death Studies, 23,_
101–118. https:// doi.org/10.17514/JNDS-​ 2004-​ 23-​ 2-​ p101-​ 118.
Spanos, N. P., Menary, E., Gabora, N. J., DuBreuil, S. C., & Dewhirst, B. (1991).
Secondary identity enactments during hypnotic past-​ life regression: A socio-


-----

226 JOURNAL OF NEAR-DEATH STUDIES

cognitive perspective. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61_ , 308–
320. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022–3514.61.2.308
Stevenson, I. (1966). University of Virginia Press. _Twenty cases suggestive of reincarnation._
Stevenson, I. (1969). The belief in reincarnation and related cases among the
Eskimos of Alaska. _Proceedings of the Parapsychological Association, 6,_ 53–55.
Stevenson, I. (1985). The belief in reincarnation among the Igbo of Nigeria. _Journal of Asian and African Studies, 20,_ 13–30. https://doi.org/10.1177/002190
968502000102
Stevenson, I. (1986). Characteristics of cases of the reincarnation type among
the Igbo of Nigeria. _Journal of Asian and African Studies, 21,_ 204–216. https://
doi.org/10.1177/002190968602100305
Stevenson, I. (1997). _Reincarnation and biology: A contribution to the etiology of_
_birthmarks and birth defects, Volumes I and II._ Praeger.
Stevenson, I. (2001 _). Children who remember previous lives: A question of reincarnation_ (rev. ed.). McFarland.
Stevenson, I. (2003). _European cases of the reincarnation type._ McFarland.
Stevenson, I., & Cook, E. W. (1995). Involuntary memories during severe physical illness or injury. _Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 183,_ 452–458.
https://doi.org/10.1097/00005053-​ 199507000-​ 00005
Sutherland, C. (1992). _death experiences._ Bantam. _Transformed by the light: Life after near-​_
Tucker, J. (2012). _Before: Children’s memories of previous lives._ St. Martin’s
Essentials.
Wells, A. (1993). Reincarnation beliefs among near-​ _Journal of Near-​_ _Death Studies, 12,_ 17–34. https://doi.org/10.17514/JNDS-​ death experiencers. 1993-​ 12
-​ 1-​ p17-​ 34.
Zolik, E. (1962). “Reincarnation” phenomena in hypnotic states. _International_
_Journal of Parapsychology, 4_ (3), 66–78.


-----

